readme.md, before:

# ZX Spectrum Tilemap Scroller

A simple tilemap scroller for the ZX Spectrum, written in C using Z88DK.

## Controls

- O: Scroll left
- P: Scroll right
- Q: Scroll up
- A: Scroll down

## Building

1. Make sure you have Z88DK installed
2. Run `make` to build the project
3. Load the resulting `.tap` file in your ZX Spectrum emulator

### Make parameters

- **CONFIG_MK**
  Selects the build configuration `.mk` file.
  Example:
  `make CONFIG_MK=config/basic_config.mk`

- **USER_CFLAGS**
  Extra flags appended to the Z88DK `zcc` invocation.
  Useful for passing assembler defines.
  Examples:
  `make USER_CFLAGS="-Ca-DOFFSCREEN_BUFFER_ORG=0xF000"`
  `make USER_CFLAGS="-DSHIFT_SPECIALISE=1"`

### Config file keys

Build configs live under `config/*.mk` and can define:

- `MAP_CSV`
- `TILES_ZXP`
- `MAP_WIDTH_TILES`, `MAP_HEIGHT_TILES`
- `TILE_WIDTH_PX`, `TILE_HEIGHT_PX`
- `USER_CFLAGS` (optional)

### Offscreen buffer placement

The offscreen buffer (`_offscreen_buffer`) is placed by the assembler using the
`OFFSCREEN_BUFFER_ORG` define.

- Default: `0xD000`
- Aggressive (more space for CODE/data): `0xF000`

Example:
`make CONFIG_MK=config/basic_config.mk USER_CFLAGS="-Ca-DOFFSCREEN_BUFFER_ORG=0xF000"`

## Memory map (48K Spectrum)

```
0xFFFF  +-------------------------------+
        | Stack (grows downward)        |
        |                               |
0xF000  +-------------------------------+
        | Offscreen buffer (2KB)        |  (OFFSCREEN_BUFFER_ORG=0xF000)
        | _offscreen_buffer             |
0xE800  +-------------------------------+
        | Free RAM / heap / data        |
        |                               |
0x8000  +-------------------------------+
        | Program CODE + data (z88dk)   |  (CFLAGS: -zorg=32768)
        | scroll.tap / bench_scroll.tap |
0x6000  +-------------------------------+
        | System vars / contended area  |
0x5B00  +-------------------------------+
        | Attributes (768 bytes)        |
0x5800  +-------------------------------+
        | Screen pixels (6144 bytes)    |
0x4000  +-------------------------------+
        | ROM                           |
0x0000  +-------------------------------+

Notes:
- If `OFFSCREEN_BUFFER_ORG` is set to `0xD000` (default), the offscreen buffer
  lives in the 0xD000 region instead of 0xF000.
- Embedded assets (e.g. `hud.scr`) are linked into the program image (they are
  not fixed to a specific address).
```

## Requirements

- Z88DK (tested with v2.2)
- A ZX Spectrum emulator (e.g., Fuse, ZXSpin, or ZEsarUX)

## How to use it

Build default sample game:
`make`

Build using a different config:
`make CONFIG_MK=config/basic_game.mk`

Run in Fuse:
`make run CONFIG_MK=config/basic_config.mk`

## Benchmarking (Fuse profiler)

There is a standalone benchmark program (`bench_scroll.c`) which renders a fixed
number of frames and exits. This is intended for reproducible Fuse profiling.

- Build benchmark TAP:
  `make CONFIG_MK=config/basic_config.mk bench_scroll`

- Run benchmark in Fuse:
  `make benchRun`

- Save Fuse profile output to a file (for example):
  `bench_baseline.profile`, `bench_specialised.profile`, `bench_block.profile`

## Shifted drawing implementation

### 7 fixed-shift entrypoints

`draw_shifted.asm` implements the shifted tile renderer using lookup tables.

- `_draw_shifted_asm(row, map_row, tiles_row, shift)`
  Computes the left/right shift table pointers for `shift` (1..7), then jumps
  into the shared core.

- `_draw_shifted_asm_1` .. `_draw_shifted_asm_7`
  Preload the shift table pointers for a fixed shift and jump into
  `draw_shifted_common`. This avoids per-call shift-table setup when the shift
  is constant.

### Reduced call frequency (8 scanlines per call)

`draw_shifted_block.asm` adds `_draw_shifted_block_asm(...)` which renders 8
scanlines per call. `draw_map.c` uses this to reduce call overhead (fewer C/ASM
transitions) while preserving the same pixel output.

## Viewport copy (128-bit write optimization)

The viewport blit routine (`copy_viewport.asm`, `_copy_viewport_to_screen`) copies
the 128x128 pixel offscreen buffer to the Spectrum screen.

Optimization details:

- **16-byte bursts ("128-bit" writes)**
  Each screen scanline in the viewport is 16 bytes wide. The routine copies each
  scanline using 16x `LDI` (byte copy) rather than a single `LDIR`. This reduces
  per-byte overhead (unrolled `LDI` is faster than `LDIR` on Z80).

- **2-line loop unrolling**
  The main loop processes two scanlines per iteration (64 iterations total) to
  reduce loop overhead.

- **Precomputed screen address table**
  A lookup table (`scr_addr_table`) provides the destination screen address for
  each scanline, avoiding expensive address arithmetic for the Spectrum's
  non-linear bitmap layout.

Commit message:

Document SHIFT_SPECIALISE flag for selecting shifted drawing implementation
- Add documentation for SHIFT_SPECIALISE preprocessor flag
- Explain two modes: original per-call shift (=0) vs fixed-shift entrypoints (=1)
- Include build examples with USER_CFLAGS
- Note flag is useful for benchmarking and comparing implementations

readme.md, after:

# ZX Spectrum Tilemap Scroller

A simple tilemap scroller for the ZX Spectrum, written in C using Z88DK.

## Controls

- O: Scroll left
- P: Scroll right
- Q: Scroll up
- A: Scroll down

## Building

1. Make sure you have Z88DK installed
2. Run `make` to build the project
3. Load the resulting `.tap` file in your ZX Spectrum emulator

### Make parameters

- **CONFIG_MK**
  Selects the build configuration `.mk` file.
  Example:
  `make CONFIG_MK=config/basic_config.mk`

- **USER_CFLAGS**
  Extra flags appended to the Z88DK `zcc` invocation.
  Useful for passing assembler defines.
  Examples:
  `make USER_CFLAGS="-Ca-DOFFSCREEN_BUFFER_ORG=0xF000"`
  `make USER_CFLAGS="-DSHIFT_SPECIALISE=1"`

### Config file keys

Build configs live under `config/*.mk` and can define:

- `MAP_CSV`
- `TILES_ZXP`
- `MAP_WIDTH_TILES`, `MAP_HEIGHT_TILES`
- `TILE_WIDTH_PX`, `TILE_HEIGHT_PX`
- `USER_CFLAGS` (optional)

### Offscreen buffer placement

The offscreen buffer (`_offscreen_buffer`) is placed by the assembler using the
`OFFSCREEN_BUFFER_ORG` define.

- Default: `0xD000`
- Aggressive (more space for CODE/data): `0xF000`

Example:
`make CONFIG_MK=config/basic_config.mk USER_CFLAGS="-Ca-DOFFSCREEN_BUFFER_ORG=0xF000"`

## Memory map (48K Spectrum)

```
0xFFFF  +-------------------------------+
        | Stack (grows downward)        |
        |                               |
0xF000  +-------------------------------+
        | Offscreen buffer (2KB)        |  (OFFSCREEN_BUFFER_ORG=0xF000)
        | _offscreen_buffer             |
0xE800  +-------------------------------+
        | Free RAM / heap / data        |
        |                               |
0x8000  +-------------------------------+
        | Program CODE + data (z88dk)   |  (CFLAGS: -zorg=32768)
        | scroll.tap / bench_scroll.tap |
0x6000  +-------------------------------+
        | System vars / contended area  |
0x5B00  +-------------------------------+
        | Attributes (768 bytes)        |
0x5800  +-------------------------------+
        | Screen pixels (6144 bytes)    |
0x4000  +-------------------------------+
        | ROM                           |
0x0000  +-------------------------------+

Notes:
- If `OFFSCREEN_BUFFER_ORG` is set to `0xD000` (default), the offscreen buffer
  lives in the 0xD000 region instead of 0xF000.
- Embedded assets (e.g. `hud.scr`) are linked into the program image (they are
  not fixed to a specific address).
```

## Requirements

- Z88DK (tested with v2.2)
- A ZX Spectrum emulator (e.g., Fuse, ZXSpin, or ZEsarUX)

## How to use it

Build default sample game:
`make`

Build using a different config:
`make CONFIG_MK=config/basic_game.mk`

Run in Fuse:
`make run CONFIG_MK=config/basic_config.mk`

## Benchmarking (Fuse profiler)

There is a standalone benchmark program (`bench_scroll.c`) which renders a fixed
number of frames and exits. This is intended for reproducible Fuse profiling.

- Build benchmark TAP:
  `make CONFIG_MK=config/basic_config.mk bench_scroll`

- Run benchmark in Fuse:
  `make benchRun`

- Save Fuse profile output to a file (for example):
  `bench_baseline.profile`, `bench_specialised.profile`, `bench_block.profile`

## Shifted drawing implementation

### 7 fixed-shift entrypoints

`draw_shifted.asm` implements the shifted tile renderer using lookup tables.

- `_draw_shifted_asm(row, map_row, tiles_row, shift)`
  Computes the left/right shift table pointers for `shift` (1..7), then jumps
  into the shared core.

- `_draw_shifted_asm_1` .. `_draw_shifted_asm_7`
  Preload the shift table pointers for a fixed shift and jump into
  `draw_shifted_common`. This avoids per-call shift-table setup when the shift
  is constant.

### Reduced call frequency (8 scanlines per call)

`draw_shifted_block.asm` adds `_draw_shifted_block_asm(...)` which renders 8
scanlines per call. `draw_map.c` uses this to reduce call overhead (fewer C/ASM
transitions) while preserving the same pixel output.

### Selecting shifted implementation with `-DSHIFT_SPECIALISE`

The `draw_map.c` shifted path can be compiled in two modes using the
`SHIFT_SPECIALISE` preprocessor flag:

- **`SHIFT_SPECIALISE=0`** (or undefined)
  Uses the original `_draw_shifted_asm(row, map_row, tiles_row, shift)` entrypoint.
  The shift value is passed as a parameter and computed per call.

- **`SHIFT_SPECIALISE=1`** (default)
  Uses the 7 fixed-shift entrypoints `_draw_shifted_asm_1.._7`. The C code
  selects the appropriate entrypoint once per frame with a `switch(shift)` and
  calls it directly, avoiding per-call shift-table setup.

#### Building with the flag

```sh
# Use specialized 7-entrypoint shifted drawing (default)
make CONFIG_MK=config/basic_config.mk USER_CFLAGS="-DSHIFT_SPECIALISE=1"

# Use original per-call shifted drawing
make CONFIG_MK=config/basic_config.mk USER_CFLAGS="-DSHIFT_SPECIALISE=0"
```

The flag is useful for benchmarking or when you want to compare the two
implementations without changing the source code.

## Viewport copy (128-bit write optimization)

The viewport blit routine (`copy_viewport.asm`, `_copy_viewport_to_screen`) copies
the 128x128 pixel offscreen buffer to the Spectrum screen.

Optimization details:

- **16-byte bursts ("128-bit" writes)**
  Each screen scanline in the viewport is 16 bytes wide. The routine copies each
  scanline using 16x `LDI` (byte copy) rather than a single `LDIR`. This reduces
  per-byte overhead (unrolled `LDI` is faster than `LDIR` on Z80).

- **2-line loop unrolling**
  The main loop processes two scanlines per iteration (64 iterations total) to
  reduce loop overhead.

- **Precomputed screen address table**
  A lookup table (`scr_addr_table`) provides the destination screen address for
  each scanline, avoiding expensive address arithmetic for the Spectrum's
  non-linear bitmap layout.
